described MTT lookup process (#58)
riscv/riscv-smmtt: chapter4.adoc

[[Smmtt]]
== `Smmtt`: Hart MTT Extension

[[Smmtt-rw]]
=== Smmtt[34 | 46 | 56]rw

The `PPN` rooted structure for the MTT is shown below. The structure
below shows a 56 bit physical address lookup; for lower physical address

> widths e.g. 46 bits, the `MTTL3` table is not applicable. Each

Reviewer: Could we add a note that the sizes shown for L3 and L2 tables are their maximum size. However only the parts of the table that correspond to memory present in the platform need to be actually available. Could give an example of where if a machine only has 40 bit physical memory as an example to show that only first N entries of L2 are accessed.

Reviewer: Having the SPA being show as having 4 pn parts may want to be a separate diagram and it can be referenced from the walk section. The table layout can then be another diagram (which also includes the PA with pn split). Alternately some way to draw attention that "pn[i]" in walk process actually refers to what is shown in this diagram would help.

Author: updated to show SPA separately also

physical-addressable page is associated with an access-permission encoding.

> <<mtt-map-rw>> shows the Physical address (PA) being used to index into the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<<mtt-map-rw>> shows the Supervisor Physical address (SPA) being used to index into the
```

`MTT` structure in memory to lookup access permissions for the supervisor domain
specified in the `MTTL1` entry. Intermediate `MTTL3` and `MTTL2` entries are

> used to allow this structure to be sparsely populated.

Reviewer: Smmtt34 is clearly intended to support RV32. Howeve the L2 entries are 8 bytes wide which is wider than RV32 XLEN. Do we want to separate Smmtt34 to only have 4 byte L2 entries?

Author: will make all MTT L2 and L1 PTEs XLEN dependent

The `TYPE` field determines the interpretation of the `MTTL2` entry. The
`TYPE` field encoding is as follows:

* 0000b - `1G_disallow` - read, write or execute access is not allowed for the
           1G range for the supervisor domain.
* 0001b - `1G_allow_rx` - read and execute access for the 1G range is allowed
          for the supervisor domain.
* 0010b - `1G_allow_rw` - read and write access for the 1G range is allowed
          for the supervisor domain
* 0011b - `1G_allow_rwx` - read, write and execute access for the 1G range is
          allowed for the supervisor domain
* 0100b - `MTT_L1_DIR` - The 32M range is composed of 8192 x 4K pages
* 0111b - `2M_PAGES` - The 32M range is composed of 16 x 2M pages
* All other encodings are `reserved` and cause an access violation

The `INFO` field depends on the `TYPE` field and is formatted as per the
following table:

[[Smmtt-rw-l2-encoding]]
.`MTTL2` Entry Type for Smmtt
[width="100%",cols="25%,75%",options="header",]
|===
|*`MTTL2` Entry `TYPE`* |*Description, `INFO` and `TYPE` field encoding*
|`1G_disallow` a|
_read, write or execute is not allowed to this 1G address range for the domain._
The `INFO` field must be 0.

> When configuring 1G ranges, RDSM ensures that 16 `MTTL2` entries, each

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: rephrase (and subsequent instances) to "RDSM must ensure", since it is about FW responsibility.

> When configuring 1G ranges, RDSM ensures that 16 `MTTL2` entries, each

Reviewer 2: that 16 `MTTL2` entries, each corresponding to 64M of address space
-> that **32** `MTTL2` entries, each corresponding to **32M** of address space

> When configuring 1G ranges, RDSM ensures that 16 `MTTL2` entries, each

Author: ```suggestion
When configuring 1G ranges, RDSM must ensure that 32 `MTTL2` entries, each
```

> corresponding to 64M of address space, have identical `TYPE` field values.

Author: ```suggestion
corresponding to 32M of address space, have identical `TYPE` field values.
```

|`1G_allow_rx` a|
_read and execute (but no write) are allowed to this 1G address range for the
domain._
The `INFO` field must be 0.
When configuring 1G ranges, RDSM ensures that 32 `MTTL2` entries, each
corresponding to 32M of address space, have identical `TYPE` field values.

|`1G_allow_rw` a|
_read and write (but no execute) are allowed to this 1G address range for the
domain._
The `INFO` field must be 0.
When configuring 1G ranges, RDSM ensures that 32 `MTTL2` entries, each
corresponding to 32M of address space, have identical `TYPE` field values.

|`1G_allow_rwx` a|
_read, write and execute are allowed to this 1G address range for the domain._
The `INFO` field must be 0.
When configuring 1G ranges, RDSM ensures that 32 `MTTL2` entries, each
corresponding to 32M of address space, have identical `TYPE` field values.

|`MTT_L1_DIR` a|
The `INFO` field provides the PPN of the `MTTL1` page.
Entries of the `MTTL1` page hold a 4-bit `PERM` field to indicate the access
for the supervisor domain (described in the `MTTL1` entry <<mtt-l1-rw>>).

|`2M_PAGES` a|
_The 32M range of address space is partitioned into 2M pages where each

> page has read/write access allowed/not._

Reviewer: read/write/execute

> page has read/write access allowed/not._

Author: ```suggestion
page has read/write/execute access allowed/not._
```

The `INFO` field 31:0 holds 2 `PERM` bits per 2M address range to indicate
`rwx_disallowed` (00b), `rx_allowed` (01b), `rw_allowed` (10b), `rwx_allowed`

> (11b). Bits 32:43 are reserved and must be zero.

Reviewer: Indicate that other INFO field bits must be 0? When access is not allowed  it causes access violation.

Reviewer: rwx_disallowed -> access disallowed?

Reviewer: It may not be obvious what "rx_allowed" means. Maybe use same language as used for L1 access permission encodings description?

Author: fixed

], config:{lanes: 1, hspace:1024}}
....

[caption="Figure {counter:image}: ", reftext="Figure {image}"]
[title="`MTTL2` entry (XLEN=32)"]
[wavedrom, ,svg]
....
{reg: [
  {bits:  22, name: 'INFO'},
  {bits:  4,  name: 'TYPE'},
  {bits:  1,  name: 'L/H'},

>   {bits:  6,  name: 'ZERO'},

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  {bits:  5,  name: 'ZERO'},
```

`MTT_L1_DIR`), go to step 5. Otherwise, the _mpte_ is a pointer to the next
level of the `MTT`. Let _i_ = _i_-1. If _i_ < 0, stop and raise an access-fault
exception corresponding to the original access type. Otherwise, let
_a_ = _mpte.ppn_ x PAGESIZE and go to step 2. Note that when _mpte.type_ =
`MTT_L1_DIR`, the _mpte.ppn_ field is the value of the _mpte.info_ field.

5. A leaf _mpte_ has been found. If any bits or encodings within _mpte.type_
and _mpte.info_ that are reserved for future standard use, per
<<Smmtt-rw-l2-encoding>>, are set within _mpte_, stop and raise an access-fault
exception corresponding to the access type.

6. The _mpte_ is a valid leaf _mpte_. Fetch the access-permissions for the
physical address per the steps described below:

* if _i_=1, and the _mpte.type_ field directly specifies the access-permissions
for 1GB page regions (via 32 MTTL2 entries with identical _mpte.type_ values -
see <<Smmtt-rw-l2-encoding>>); go to step 7, else

* if _i_=1, and the _mpte.type_ field value is `2M_PAGES`, then the
_mpte.info_[31:0] field contains 16 entries of 2-bit access-permissions encoding
for 16 2M address regions (see <<Smmtt-rw-l2-encoding>>); go to step 7, else

> * If _i_=0, the _mpte_ contains a 4-bit entry that holds the access-permission

Reviewer: The mpte actually contains 16x4-bit entries. May want to describe this as a shift and mask or say extract bits i:j where i and j are determined by pa[0].

encodings for 4KB pages. The 4-bit access-permission encoding for the _pa_ is
held in _mpte_ and indexed via _pa.pn[i]_. The encodings are specified in

> <<Smmtt-rw-l1-encoding>> table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<<Smmtt-rw-l1-encoding>>.
```

7. Determine if the requested physical memory access is allowed per the

> access-permissions. If access is not permitted, stop and raise a page-fault

Reviewer: page-fault -> access-fault.

> access-permissions. If access is not permitted, stop and raise a page-fault

Author: ```suggestion
access-permissions. If access is not permitted, stop and raise an access-fault
```

exception corresponding to the original access type.

8. The access is allowed per the `MTT` lookup.

All implicit accesses to the non-leaf memory tracking table data structures in

> this algorithm are performed using width NON_LEAF_PTE_SIZE.

Reviewer: This may be problematic for RV32.

Author: will fix by making MTT L2, L1 entries XLEN dependent

], config:{lanes: 1, hspace:1024}}
....

=== MTT access permissions lookup process

MTT access permissions for a physical address PA in the context of a
supervisor domain is ascertained as follows:

> 1. Let a be `mttp.ppn`x`PAGESIZE`, and let i = LEVELS, where for mode

Reviewer: replace: a -> _a_

> 1. Let a be `mttp.ppn`x`PAGESIZE`, and let i = LEVELS, where for mode

Author: ```suggestion
1. Let _a_ be `mttp.ppn`x`PAGESIZE`, and let _i_ = LEVELS, where for mode
```

> Smmtt[34][*], LEVELS = 2 and for Smmtt[46, 56][*rw*] LEVELS = 3; PAGESIZE is

Reviewer: Smmtt[34][*] -> Smmtt34*
Smmtt[46, 56][*rw*] -> Smmtt[46|56]*

Reviewer 2: I thought LEVELS=3 only applies to Smmtt56.

Reviewer: for 46 and 56 the level should be 3.

> Smmtt[34][*], LEVELS = 2 and for Smmtt[46, 56][*rw*] LEVELS = 3; PAGESIZE is

Author: ```suggestion
Smmtt34, LEVELS = 2 and for Smmtt[46 | 56][rw] LEVELS = 3; PAGESIZE is
```

> 2^12; MTT NON_LEAF_PTE_SIZE = 8 bytes. The `mttp` register must be active,

Reviewer 2: Any reason why we call it NON_LEAF_PTE_SIZE instead of MPTE_SIZE?

Author: at the leaf level, the entry size for MTT entries are 2 bits and 4 bits for Smmtt[*] and Smmtt[*]rw resp.

> i.e., the effective privilege mode must be HS-mode, S-mode or U-mode.

Reviewer: Also include "HS-mode, S-mode or U-mode." -> "S/HS-mode, U-mode, VS-mode, or VU-mode." or could say "not M".

> i.e., the effective privilege mode must be HS-mode, S-mode or U-mode.

Author: ```suggestion
i.e., the effective privilege mode must be not-M-mode.
```

2. Let mpte be the value of the MTT PTE at address a + pa.ppn[i] x
NON_LEAF_PTE_SIZE. If accessing pte violates a PMA or PMP check, raise

> an access-fault exception corresponding to the original access type.

Reviewer: The section describing the table layout uses "PA[..]" terminology for the index bits. Use of "pn[0], pn[1]..." in those tables is better. Here "pa.ppn" -> "pa.pn".

3. If any bits or encodings that are reserved for future standard use are

> set within mpte, stop and raise a page-fault exception corresponding to

Reviewer: mpte -> _mpte_

Reviewer: "page-fault" -> "access fault"

> set within mpte, stop and raise a page-fault exception corresponding to

Author: ```suggestion
set within _mpte_, stop and raise an access-fault exception corresponding to
```

the original access type.

4. Otherwise, the mpte is valid. If (i=0) or (i=1 and mpte.type is not
`MTT_L1_DIR`), go to step 5. Otherwise, the mpte is a pointer to the next
level of the MTT. Let i = i - 1. If i < 0, stop and raise a page-fault

> exception corresponding to the original access type. Otherwise, let

Reviewer: "page-fault" -> "access fault"

> 4. Otherwise, the mpte is valid. If (i=0) or (i=1 and mpte.type is not
> `MTT_L1_DIR`), go to step 5. Otherwise, the mpte is a pointer to the next
> level of the MTT. Let i = i - 1. If i < 0, stop and raise a page-fault
> exception corresponding to the original access type. Otherwise, let

Author: ```suggestion
4. Otherwise, the _mpte_ is valid. If (_i_=0) or (_i_=1 and _mpte.type_ is not
`MTT_L1_DIR`), go to step 5. Otherwise, the _mpte_ is a pointer to the next
level of the `MTT`. Let _i_ = _i_ - 1. If _i_ < 0, stop and raise an access-fault
exception corresponding to the original access type. Otherwise, let
```

a = mpte.ppn x PAGESIZE and go to step 2. Note that when mpte.type =

> MTT_L1_DIR, the mpte.ppn field is the value of the mpte.info field.

Reviewer: These should go into two different step - one for L1_DIR case and one otherwise.

Author: I didn't parse your comment. there are only 2 cases, leaf or non-leaf - the case for non-L1_DIR is the leaf case which is handled in step 5.

5. A leaf mpte has been found. Determine if the requested physical memory
access is allowed per the access permission encoding, AND'ing the MTT

> permissions with the cumulative read, write, execute permissions derived from

Reviewer 2: What is the purpose of the statement "AND'ing the MTT permissions etc.."? MTT applies to physical accesses only, i.e. at the stage when the 3rd-stage lookup is performed, the lower stages (1/2) already decided to proceed to/block physical access.

Author: perhaps i need to split implicit vs explicit and specify leaf pte - for implicit reads, writes PA permissions from MTT alone is sufficient to allow/deny - for the final PA - the 1st stage and/or the G-stage permissions may disallow writes, but the MTT may be in a Smmtt[x]rw mode and allow rw for that PA - in that case the effective permission if any caching is performed should be the AND of the permissions accumulated from 1st, G and MTT.

> permissions with the cumulative read, write, execute permissions derived from

Reviewer: Why allow for write-only permissions? Why do the ANDing? If the read permission is not available then cause an access fault. If the access is an implicit or explicit write then cause an access fault.

Author: for implicit reads, writes that makes sense - for the final PA - the 1st stage and/or the G-stage permissions may disallow writes, but the MTT may allow rw - and the effective permission if any caching is performed should be the AND of the permissions accumulated from 1st, G and MTT.

> 1st-stage and G-stage translation (if active). If access is not permitted,

Reviewer: neither stage translation need to be active for MTT checks.

Reviewer: The steps for processing L1 table should be described in a separate step. It may be useful  to separate the procedure for the three *rw format from the other three format. The tests for reserved encodings in L1 are missing.

Reviewer: Checks for reserved bits in INFO field bits 63:32 (table 4 seems to have a typo) is missing.

Author: i can split the steps out for the two top level modes. agree that neither stage translation needs to be active - hence the "if active" note in parentheses.  

will add note for reserved bits in INFO field (thanks)

stop and raise a page-fault exception corresponding to the original access
type. If i=1, the mpte.type field (for 1GB pages) and the mpte.info field
(for 2MB pages) holds the access permissions for superpages(also shown in
Tables 3 and 4). If i=0, the mpte contains 2 bit access permission encodings
(or 4 bit for mode `Smmtt[*]rw`) for 4KB pages. The 2/4-bit access permission
encoding for the PA is held in the ppn referenced by mpte.info and

> indexed via pa.ppn[i]. For modes `Smmtt[*]`, access allowed implies read,

Reviewer: Since these are bit indices they may want to be called out separately.

], config:{lanes: 1, hspace:1024}}
....

=== MTT access permissions lookup process

MTT access-permissions for a physical address PA in the context of a
supervisor domain is ascertained as follows:

1. Let _a_ be `mttp.ppn` x _PAGESIZE_, and let _i_ = LEVELS, where for mode
`Smmtt34[rw]`, _LEVELS_ = 2 and for `Smmtt[46 | 56][rw]` LEVELS = 3; _PAGESIZE_

> is 2^12; MTT _NON_LEAF_PTE_SIZE_ = 8 bytes. The `mttp` register must be active,

Reviewer 2: 2^12 -> 2<sup>12</sup>  (seems to be the preferred style in RV docs)

i.e., the effective privilege mode must be not-M-mode.

> 2. Let _mpte_ be the value of the `MTT` table entry at address _a_ + _pa.pn[i]_

Author: will fix

 x _NON_LEAF_PTE_SIZE_. If accessing _mpte_ violates a PMA or PMP check, raise
an access-fault exception corresponding to the original access type.

3. If any bits or encodings that are reserved for future standard use are
set within _mpte_, stop and raise an access-fault exception corresponding to
the original access type.

4. Otherwise, the _mpte_ is valid. If (_i_=0) or (_i_=1 and _mpte.type_ is not
`MTT_L1_DIR`), go to step 5. Otherwise, the _mpte_ is a pointer to the next
level of the `MTT`. Let _i_ = _i_-1. If _i_ < 0, stop and raise an access-fault
exception corresponding to the original access type. Otherwise, let
_a_ = _mpte.ppn_ x _PAGESIZE_ and go to step 2. Note that when _mpte.type_ =

> `MTT_L1_DIR`, the _mpte.ppn_ field is the value of the _mpte.info_ field.

Reviewer: This note is not needed since if it was MTT_L1_DIR we would have branched to step 5.

5. A leaf _mpte_ has been found. If any bits or encodings within _mpte.type_
and _mpte.info_ that are reserved for future standard use, per
<<Smmtt-rw-l2-encoding>> and <<Smmtt-ad-l2-encoding>>, are set within _mpte_,
stop and raise an access-fault exception corresponding to the access type.

6. The _mpte_ is a valid leaf _mpte_. Fetch the access-permissions for the
physical address per the steps described below:

* if _i_=1, and the _mpte.type_ field specifies it holds the access-permission
encoding for 1GB pages per <<Smmtt-rw-l2-encoding>> and <<Smmtt-ad-l2-encoding>>
; go to step 7, else

* if _i_=1, and the _mpte.type_ field specifies it holds the access-permission
encoding for 2MB pages; the _mpte.info_ field contains the access-permission
encoding per <<Smmtt-rw-l2-encoding>> and <<Smmtt-ad-l2-encoding>>; go to
step 7, else

> * If _i_=0, the _mpte_ contains a 2-bit entry for mode `Smmtt[34 | 46 | 56]`

Reviewer: when i is 0, the mpte holds an array of 2 bit or 4-bit entries.

Author: updated

that holds the access-permission encodings (or 4-bit entry for mode
`Smmtt[34 | 46 | 56]rw`) for 4KB pages. The 2/4-bit access-permission encoding
for the PA is held in the ppn referenced by _mpte.info_ and indexed via
_pa.pn[i]_. The encodings are specified in <<Smmtt-rw>> and <<Smmtt-ad>> for the

> `Smmtt[34 | 46 | 56]` and `Smmtt[34 | 46 | 56]rw` modes respectively.

Reviewer: This could be more clearly specified if the *rw was separate into its own section or similar to LEVELS there should be a parameter for 2 or 4 bit that is setup ahead of time and then used in the algorithm to extract the right 2 or 4 bits - this could be described in the form of a shift and a mask.

Reviewer: Could the two table formats have been unified as only 2 bits are needed in either case? 
Could it be:
00 - not allowed
01 - read and execute allowed
10 - read and write allowed
11 - read, write, and execute allowed
Then 01 and 10 encoding can just be reserved for non-rw mode but the table layout would be identical.

Author: will be updated in PR revision - ptal

7. Determine if the requested physical memory access is allowed per the

> access-permissions. If access is not permitted, stop and raise a page-fault

Reviewer: This determination varies based on *rw or not. This step should elaborate precisely how this determination is made. If all encodings of the 2 or 4 bit are not legal then that also needs to be checked.

Reviewer: In table 3 - 1G_Allow_r can be changed to 1G_Allow_rx. The descriptions in table  3 should also clarify what is meant by read/write.

Reviewer: Likewise the PERM description:
"0001b - the 4K page specifies read access is allowed for the domain" -> "0001b - the 4K page specifies read and execute access is allowed for the domain"

Author: will be updated in PR revision - ptal

exception corresponding to the original access type. For modes
`Smmtt[34 | 46 | 56]`, access-allowed implies read, write and execute
permissions. For modes `Smmtt[34 | 46 | 56]rw`, read access implies read and
execute, and read-write permission implies read and write (but no execute).

8. The access is allowed per the `MTT` lookup.

All implicit accesses to the non-leaf memory tracking table data structures in
this algorithm are performed using width _NON_LEAF_PTE_SIZE_.

[NOTE]
====
Implementations may cache any translation (due to 1st stage and/or G-stage
translation) and access-permissions for the final (leaf) physical address
being accessed - in this case, the `MTT`-derived access-permissions are

> AND'ed to accumulate the effective read, write, and execute permissions. Thus,

Reviewer: Smmtt should not prescribe microarchitecture. ANDing with effective read/write/execute permissions will be wrong - consider single stage page table for simplicity. If the TLB has a r, w, and x bit - and say the single stage PTE grants them all but the MTT only grants read/execute permission. With anding it would lead to TLB holding R=1, W=0, X=1. Now if a store hits that TLB entry should implementation raise a page-fault or should it raise an access fault?

Author: reduced the note to the main part:

[NOTE]
====
MTT access-permissions can only further restrict access, and never grant
read, write or execute permission denied by 1st-stage or G-stage translations.
====

MTT access-permissions can only further restrict access, and never grant
permission denied by 1st-stage or G-stage translations.
====

=== Access Enforcement and Fault Reporting

As shown in <<mtt-lookup>>, and described in the MTT lookup process,

> MTT lookup composes with, but does not require,

Reviewer: pn's are referenced in the algorithm as indexed by the level `i` buit the diagrams show pn as being a single field (e.g. diagram shows pn[56:46] is used as index into L2) but the algorithm says pn[i] - for i=2 this would mean use bit 2 of pn.

Author: will fix
